Ames Laboratory, US Department of Energy, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa
Abstract—The anisotropy of solid–liquid interfacial energy for an Al–4.0 wt% Cu alloy is determinedthrough measurement of equilibrium shape. Measurements are performed using a fine dispersion of liquidparticles entrained within a single-crystal single-phase solid. Specimens are sectioned normal to the 具1 0 0典direction in the continuous phase, and the droplets are observed to exhibit four-fold symmetry on this plane.The radial variation on this plane is measured using optical and chemical techniques, and the normalizedanisotropy parameter is determined to be 0.98%. Equilibrium conditions are validated, and quench effectsare investigated using microchemical analysis techniques.  2001 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by ElsevierScience Ltd. All rights reserved.
Several techniques have been reported in the litera-ture for the measurements of the solid–liquid interfa-cial energy. A common indirect method for determi-nation of this property is the nucleation method,where the maximum undercooling required for theonset of nucleation is measured [5]. This technique islimited in that only the average value of interfacialenergy can be determined. In addition, the maximumundercooling is often not achieved due to the pres-ence of catalytic sites in the system [6]. Another com-mon technique is the grain boundary groove method,which utilizes the equilibrium conditions at the triple-line between two solid grains and a liquid [7, 8].Although this technique has given significant resultsfor average values of the interfacial energy, it has notyet been used for the measurement of anisotropy. Ithas been shown, however, that grain boundary groovemorphology is significantly affected by anisotropy[9], and recent modeling results suggest that this maypotentially be a very sensitive measurement technique[10]. The orientation-dependent interfacial energy canalso be measured directly by characterizing the equi-librium shape of solid particles in a liquid or liquiddroplets in a solid. This technique has been success-fully applied to several transparent materials [11–14],but application to metallic materials has provided lim-ited results [15–18]. In the work described here, theanisotropy of crystal-melt interfacial energy for anAl–4.0 wt% Cu alloy is determined from the equilib-rium shape of entrained liquid droplets.
where m indicates the degree of rotational crystalsymmetry about the section plane normal. Using onlythe first term of the series, the 2-D Wulff shape fora cubic metal, taken on a {0 0 1} plane, becomes
The value of the anisotropy parameter, e4, has beenmeasured experimentally for model transparent sys-tems in which the equilibrium shape can be observedin situ. Jones and Chadwick obtained equilibriumshapes of liquid droplets in the solid for camphene,succinonitrile and white phosphorus [11]. They foundthat the aspect ratios were within a few percent ofunity. However they did not quantitatively evaluatethe magnitude of the anisotropy parameter. Moredetailed studies of the equilibrium shape of liquiddroplets in a solid were carried out by Glicksman andcoworkers, who obtained the value e4 = 0.005 for suc-cinonitrile [12] and e4 = 0.05 for pivalic acid [13].Experiments were also carried out by Muschol et al.who obtained the value of e4 = 0.00554 for succinon-itrile and e4 = 0.025 for pivalic acid [14].
In addition to transparent materials, the equilibriumshape method has been used to study interfacialenergy in opaque metallic systems [15–18]. In thesesystems, the solid is generally more dense than theliquid and particles tend to settle due to gravitationaleffects. Consequently, equilibrium shapes are moreeffectively measured using a fine dispersion of liquiddroplets that are entrained in the solid. Since theliquid droplets are fine, the distortions in their shapesdue to gravitational effects are negligible.
With the objective of preparing an equilibrium lowvolume-fraction dispersion of liquid droplets in a sin-
To verify that equilibrium conditions were achi-eved in the droplets examined, a composition profilewas measured using SEM/EDS along a line across thedroplet and into the solid. A typical result is shown inFig. 2 for a droplet with 苲150 μm diameter. The com-position in the solid was found to be uniform, and theratio of compositions in the solid and in the dropletat the interface was found to be 0.18 which is closeto the value of the equilibrium solute partition coef-ficient at 595°C for the Al–Cu system.
Fig. 1. Typical droplet distribution observed in the quenchedspecimen on a cross-section normal to a 具0 0 1典 direction in the
Fig. 2. Composition profile measured along a radial directionof droplet A, verifying that equilibrium conditions had been
In order to quantitatively determine the deviationfrom circularity, two tangential circles are superim-posed on the droplet images in each of the figures:the solid one is the tangent circles to the equilibriumshape along 具1 0 0典 directions, and the dotted one isto 具1 1 0典 directions. The radius of the former circleis denoted as rmax, while the radius for the 具1 1 0典tangential circle is taken as rmin. Accordingly, the twosets of axes are offset by p/4. For each cross-sectionanalyzed, the deviation from circularity, d, in the{1 0 0} examination plane was measured by findingthe difference in radius between the minimum andmaximum concentric tangent circle:
The relevant droplet shape is that which is in equi-
Fig. 3. Equilibrium shapes of droplets A, B, and C, eachobserved on diametral cross-sections normal to a 具0 0 1典 direc-
librium at the two-phase treatment temperature, T2.The shape that is measured visually, however, is thatof the droplet after quenching. The shape of the as-quenched droplet may deviate from the true equilib-rium shape because interface motion of severalmicrometers may occur during the quench [20, 21].To assess the influence of quenching on the dropletshape, composition profiles across the interface weremeasured using SEM/EDS. Prior to quenching theequilibrated structure, the composition profile in thesolid is uniform. However, solid that forms due to
Table 1. Droplet shape measurements and associated anisotropy
The method used to determine the diameter dic-tated by the composition profiles is outlined in Fig.4 for droplet A. The horizontal line, AB, representsthe average composition measured in the solid phase.The transition at the interface is characterized by lineDE by fitting the related data. The interface location,C, is then indicated by the intersection between thelines AB and DE. A similar method was applied todetermine C⬘ on the right hand side of the profiles inFig. 4. For each of the 具1 0 0典 and 具1 1 0典 directions,the diameter of the droplet is given by the distanceCC⬘. It was found that the interface advanced 1–3 μmduring the quenching depending upon the size of eachindividual droplet and therefore the composition scanmethod gives slightly larger diameters, as shown inTable 1.
Fig. 4. Composition profiles measured using SEM/EDS fordroplet A, revealing the prequench droplet diameter along vari-ous directions. Profiles along (a) [1 1 0] and [1 ̄ 1 0] directionsand (b) [1 0 0] and [0 1 0] directions are consistent with theexpected four-fold symmetry and were used to determine the
liquid droplets in an oriented single-crystal solid foran Al–4.0 wt% Cu alloy. The anisotropy of interfacialenergy was determined from measurements ofquenched droplet shape. The existence of equilibriumconditions was established through compositionmeasurements that verified solute homogeneity priorto quenching. The effect of quenching was eliminatedfrom droplet shape measurements by using compo-sition profiles near the droplet interface to determinethe pre-quench interface location. Using these pro-cedures for 2-D equilibrium shape measurements onselected {0 0 1} sections, the magnitude of anisotropyfor the solid–liquid interfacial energy was determinedto be 0.98% for an Al–4.0 wt% Cu alloy.
